PREOPS-1152: Document plan for DP0.3 (#1)
lsst/rtn-050: index.rst

Abstract
========

> Describes the means of serving the desired DP0.3 data through the services of the Rubin Science Platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This technote describes the means by which the desired DP0.3 dataset will be served through the services of the Rubin Science Platform.
```

Initially will serve as a proposal and then evolve into an as-built description.

Motivation and Overview
=======================

Ticket `PREOPS-1152`_ and a recent revision of `RTN-011`_ envision the creation of a new entry in the "DP0"

> (simulated and/or precursor data) series of Data Previews:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(simulated data) series of Data Previews:
```

Reviewer: We have now defined all "Data Previews" to be based on LSST or LSST-like (simulated) data only.  Precursor datasets do not form part of the DP program

Author: Good catch - I wrote this before the final decision about DP1.

service of an existing catalog-based "fast simulation" of the expected Solar System data from the LSST survey,

> not tied to image data and not the output of the main Science Pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not tied to image data nor any output of the LSST Science Pipelines.
```

> This "DP0.3" would provide some exposure to the Rubin Science Platform (RSP) and the planned Solar System data model to Data Previews delegates, and allow the early testing of certain features of the RSP that are specific to Solar System (or, more precisely, moving-object) data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This "DP0.3" would provide some exposure to the Rubin Science Platform (RSP) and the planned Solar System data model to Data Preview delegates, and allow the early testing of certain features of the RSP that are specific to Solar System (or, more precisely, moving-object) data.
```

> As presently discussed, this Data Preview would be made available to users in mid-2023.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data Preview 0.3 is planned for release to users sometime between June and September 2023. \citeds{rtn-011}
```

Author: Thanks - again, this was drafted before that decision.

The fast simulation, generated by the Solar System Science Collaboration (SSSC), represents the results of the full ten-year baseline LSST survey.
Four catalog tables involved with Solar System science and the Rubin moving-object pipeline would be served as part of DP0.3:
``DIASource``, ``SSSource``, ``SSObject``, and ``MPCORB``.
The first two tables will each have approximately one billion rows each, and the last two will have approximately ten million rows each.

The proposed exercise has some notable limitations compared to the final expected environment for Solar System data:

> - As the data are the result of a "fast simulation" without imaging, none of the capabilities of the RSP dealing with imaging data would be exercised.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- As the data are the result of a "fast simulation" without imaging, none of the capabilities of the RSP dealing with imaging data will be exercised.
```

>   For the most part this is not a concern, since DP0.2 has been exercising those capabilities, but there is at least one relevant special case:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For the most part this is not a concern, since those capabilities are currently being exercised by DP0.2 and will be exercised by DP1 and DP2 in future, but there is at least one relevant special case:
```

>   - It is planned to provide for time-series queries on moving objects in the RSP that appear together with appropriate cutouts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Support for time-series queries on moving objects in the RSP that appear together with appropriate cutouts
```

Author: Rewritten a bit differently.

>   - It is planned to provide for time-series queries on moving objects in the RSP that appear together with appropriate cutouts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - During full operations with LSSTCam, the RSP will support time-series queries for moving objects together with appropriate cutouts
```

>     in the images on which the points in the time series were observed, i.e., following the object across the sky.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    in the images on which the points in the time series were observed, i.e., following the object across the sky, is planned however 
```

>     This would not be possible in DP0.3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    this will not be possible in DP0.3.
```

  - More generally, the usual linkages from single-epoch measurements in catalog tables (in this case, ``DIASource`` and ``SSSource``)

>     to the associated images would not be available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    to the associated images will not be available.
```

> - As the result of a static simulation, rather than a progressive nightly release through the PPDB as we will have in Operations,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- As the DP0.3 dataset is the result of a static simulation, rather than a progressive nightly release through the PPDB, as we will have in Operations,
```

>   DP0.3 would not exercise certain dynamic aspects of the data model, such as the transformation from DIAObject to SSObject when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  DP0.3 will not exercise certain dynamic aspects of the data model, such as the transformation from DIAObject to SSObject when
```

  sufficient data are accumulated to allow identification of a previous DIAObject as arising from an SSO.

>   It would therefore also not exercise the ability of users of the RSP to follow and/or replay that evolution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It will therefore also not exercise the ability of users of the RSP to follow and/or replay that evolution.
```

.. _PREOPS-1152: https://jira.lsstcorp.org/browse/PREOPS-1152
.. _RTN-011: https://rtn-011.lsst.io/

Input Data
==========

The simulation itself is described at https://github.com/lsst-sssc/lsst-simulation .
It produces the following tables, all of which have reference definitions in the `DPDD`_:

.. _table-ssotables:

.. table:: Major tables to be included in a Solar System DP0.3.  

   +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+--------------+-------------------+---------------------+
   | Table     | Purpose                                          | Size in rows | Number of columns | Data volume on disk |
   |           |                                                  |              | (actual/DPDD)     | (in XXX format)     |
   +===========+==================================================+==============+===================+=====================+
   | DIASource | Observation in a single difference image         | ~1B          |                   |                     |
   +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+--------------+-------------------+---------------------+

>    | SSSource  | Apparition of a reconstructed SSO in an image    | ~1B          |                   |                     |

Reviewer 2: "Observation-specific properties of a detected Solar System object"?

   +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+--------------+-------------------+---------------------+

>    | SSObject  | Reconstructed SSO with orbital parameters        | ~10M         |                   |                     |

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what reconstructed means. I think this is more like "Measured orbital parameters for detected Solar System objects"

Author: This might be an HEP-ism in my vocabulary.  Just to explain myself: I tend to use "detect" for something more "done in one place" - like "detected source on an image", and "reconstruct" for "concluded from combining several pieces of evidence".  E.g., "the transient was first detected on February 1st; by April it had been reconstructed as an SNIa candidate and its redshift measured".

But I'm happy to make the change you suggested.

Reviewer 2: Ah right, if I heard "reconstructed particle track" I would probably have had the right association, but I think it's an unfamiliar phrasing in astronomy.

   +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+--------------+-------------------+---------------------+
   | (total)   |                                                  |              |                   | 0.5 - 1.0 TB        |
   +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+--------------+-------------------+---------------------+

The simulation is based on a specific, chosen OpSim run, which will be documented.
The actual simulation output to be used for DP0.3 is yet to be produced, but a prototype dataset exists and has been in use by the SSSC, ingested into a PostgreSQL database.

Possible image-outline table
----------------------------

As noted above, the existing SSSC data for DP0.3 is based on a catalog simulation,
with no images involved in the data chain.
However, the simulation _was_ based on a survey simulation and therefore on pointings and
sky coverage from that simulation.

It might improve the user experience, as well as allow the exercise of additional RSP capabilities,
to include a simple visit table, perhaps in ObsCore format, including the pointings and sky coverage of the

> survey on which the catalogs are based.

Reviewer: I like this idea and support including it as a **stretch** goal, i.e. we would not hold up the release of DP0.3 if this functionality were not done (or complete). It is also something that could be easily added post-DP0.3 release as an additional capability. Could you add a statement making this clear.

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit wary of dangling a nice-sounding feature if there's nobody who is well-positioned to implement it. Opsim -> ObsCore/Visit table is not a production data path and I'm not aware of any DM code to do that, so it would be "new scope" just for DP0.3 for someone in DM to implement that.

Author: @ctslater A few points:

- The only even remotely non-trivial thing about the conversion from OpSim to ObsCore is the computation of the visit outline on the sky from the boresight and rotation.  But this conversion must already have been done in order to execute the SSO simulation, so it seems like code should be available.
- Starting from that point, I'd expect to do the table conversion myself, for this static dataset.
- It is, in fact, an LSST requirement to produce and serve an ObsCore-like table based on scheduler outputs - this is the ObsLocTAP service.  I'll make this explicit in the document.
- The ability to display projected visits as outlines on the sky is not in the DM requirements, but it would be quite odd for us not to provide users with a way to visualize the output of the ObsLocTAP service, and in fact the Portal will do this for free when presented with the resulting table, or a subset of rows from it.

Reviewer 2: I agree it is not a huge amount of work, but it is also not zero work, so we should identify who is responsible for providing it. Just trying to avoid a situation where someone gets volunteered at the last minute.

This would allow, e.g., visualizing DIASource and SSSource table contents against a background of the

> visit image outlines on the sky, using existing RSP capabilities.

Reviewer: Where would the visit images come from given that DP0.3 does not contain images.

Author: They are just the polygonal outlines of the visits (as a whole, not broken down into detectors) on the sky.

.. _DPDD: https://lse-163.lsst.io/

Service Model
=============

> The RSP instance for DP0.3 would be in the IDF (Google cloud), and, we argue below,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RSP instance for DP0.3 will be in the  Interim Data Facility (IDF) hosted on the Google cloud platform, and, we argue below,
```

could and likely should share most of its components with the existing data.lsst.cloud RSP instance for DP0.2.

> The catalogs would be held in a PostgreSQL database, most likely on-premises at the USDF,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The catalogs will be held in a PostgreSQL database, most likely on-premises at the USDF,
```

in a preview of the "Hybrid Model" for the US DAC.

Back-end data for DP0.3 as envisioned herein is limited to catalogs.
Therefore no image file store is required, no image metadata service (e.g., ObsTAP), and no DataLink "links service".

The specific components that *are* required follow:

Catalog Database
----------------

> Qserv is probably not a suitable choice for the database back end, for two reasons:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Qserv is not a suitable choice for the database back end, for two reasons:
```
```suggestion
Qserv is probably not a suitable choice for the database back end, for two reasons:
```

- In the operations-era system, the SSO tables will live in the "Prompt Products Database" (PPDB), which is baselined as PostgreSQL.
- A partitioning strategy for Qserv is unclear, since SSObjects are not spatially localized, so supporting efficient queries on the
  SSObject-to-SSSource relationship might be in conflict with efficient spatial queries on the SSSource table.

Based both on SSSC experience and expert opinion, a single PostgreSQL server should be adequate for the datasets envisioned.
To support spatial searches via (CADC) TAP, the ``pgsphere`` extension should be installed on the Postgres server.

> In the "Hybrid Model" for the US DAC, the user-facing services will be in the Google cloud, with the data back ends at the USDF.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the "Hybrid Model" for the US DAC, planned from October 2023, the user-facing services will be in the Google cloud, with the data back ends at the USDF.
```
```suggestion
In the "Hybrid Model" for the US DAC, the user-facing services will be in the Google cloud, with the data back ends at the USDF.
```

Author: I'm not sure I understand the date reference.  Do we have a specific milestone for this?  I don't see one in DMTN-158 or DMTN-232.

Reviewer: It is the date when SLAC takes over the google contract, which is being taken as the transition point to the hybrid model. DP0 should refer to 'IDF' DP1/DP2 will be in the google cloud-hosted IDF

An alternative would be to configure a Postgres service at the IDF (Google cloud).
Some research will be required to determine whether a sufficiently large Postgres service can be configured easily in the Google cloud.
Pre-configured versions of Postgres with ``pgsphere`` installed are not currently available from Google.

If (see above) an additional table of visits proves desirable, this can be included in the database.

Data Services
-------------

TAP service
^^^^^^^^^^^

If the database is in Postgres, the CADC TAP service should be used.
CADC's code base has native support for Postgres back ends.
The work done in December/January 2022/23 to deploy a Postgres-based TAP service for the "live ObsTAP" instances should be applicable.
The same DataLink-support extensions to CADC TAP that were developed by SQuaRE for the Qserv-backed TAP
implementation will be needed for DP0.3 as well.

At present we do not have the ability to support multiple back ends from a single TAP service instance,
so DP0.3 will require its own TAP endpoint even if it is otherwise incorporated into data.lsst.cloud
alongside DP0.2.
For instance, "data.lsst.cloud/api/ssotap" might be a suitable name.

> 

Reviewer: Suggest adding a note clarifying that deploying a SSO specific TAP service is an interim work around and that in the eventual operations-era services there will be one TAP service for all LSST catalogs

"TAP_SCHEMA" data for the service will be obtained from Felis in the usual way,
most likely with a DP0.3-specific Felis file in the ``sdm_schemas`` repository.

> Gregory Dubois-Felsmann would develop this Felis, based on existing DPDD Felis code,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RSP Scientist, Gregory Dubois-Felsmann,  would develop this Felis, based on existing DPDD Felis code,
```

to reflect the precise DP0.3 data model, in collaboration with the SSSC experts on the dataset.

This work includes providing descriptions, units, UCDs, and foreign-key annotations showing the links
between tables in the data model.

DataLink and ancillary services
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As noted above, no DataLink "links service" for images is required or even relevant to DP0.3.

However, "one-line" query-rewriting services designed for use with DataLink will be desirable
to enable convenient user access to actions like "show me all the SSSource for this SSObject".
Such services rewrite a simple REST API query for, e.g., an SSObject ID to a TAP query with
the appropriate corresponding ADQL text.

The existing ``datalinker`` framework will be suitable for these services, and experience

> with that framework has shown that a new service can be written and released in a few hours.

Reviewer: Suggest to remove "a few hours" and replace with "can be easily written and released on the timescale for DP0.3" - we have a very bad track record of underestimating how long things take - the key point is that this can be easily done in the timeframe for DP0.3.

Author: Addressed, though a bit under protest, because the ease of doing this is a pretty significant feature of the RSP architecture.

User Interface Services
-----------------------

Portal Aspect considerations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We will need to decide whether to include DP0.3 in the same RSP instance as DP0.2.
At this time, we are assuming that will be the plan.

In that model, because of the limitation on multi-back-end TAP services, users will have to be
given a choice between DP0.2 and DP0.3 at the top of the TAP query screen in the Portal Aspect.
This is an existing capability of the Portal (see :ref:`fig-portal-tap-menu`).
Note that this requires one or the other to be the default, so, unless additional work is
requested, it might turn out to be the case that DP0.3 users have to always start their
session by changing TAP services.

.. figure:: /_static/Portal-TAP-menu.png
    :name: fig-portal-tap-menu
    :target: ../_images/Portal-TAP-menu.png

    Existing TAP service selection menu in the RSP Portal Aspect.

> 

Reviewer: Is there any possibility for users to specify their own default and have that saved as a user setting that would be default every time the user logs in?  The groups of users interested in each of DP0.2 and DP0.3 are very distinct.

Author: Not on the DP0.3 time scale, no.

However, I expect we can provide DP0.3 users a DP0.3-specific URL, which they could bookmark, for instance, for starting the Portal already pointed to the DP0.3 TAP service.

Once the TAP service is selected, the user will be presented with a menu of available tables.

> The presentation order of tables, and of columns within tables, are controlled by the Felix-based

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The presentation order of tables, and of columns within tables, are controlled by the Felis-based
```

> TAP_SCHEMA metadata mentioned above.

Reviewer: suggest to add "and hence the optimal order can be set in agreement with the SSSC"

The Portal Aspect displays all spatially-organized tabular query results against a default
context image, generally a HiPS map.
In DP0.2, we have changed that default context image to be a HiPS image of just the DC2 field.
This was important as DP0.2 exists in a simulated universe not based on the real sky.

For DP0.3, a real sky is appropriate as the context image.
If DP0.3 is in the same RSP instance as DP0.2, we will have to develop a means of associating
the default context image with the selected TAP service, to avoid users having to manually
change context images in every session.
We would likely use a color HiPS image from 2MASS as the default context image for DP0.3,

> unless the team has a preference for a different existing all-sky HiPS (e.g., from PanSTARRS).

Reviewer: This is good but as it requires development, if that development is delayed, it should not delay the release of DP0.3, i.e if we delivered this functionality a few months after the main release as an improvement, that would be preferable to delaying DP0.3 . Could you add a comment to that effect.

Notebook Aspect considerations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We anticipate that most users of DP0.3 will focus their work in the Python-based Notebook Aspect
environment.

We note that users will have to migrate from whatever they may be doing in the existing SSSC
environment (perhaps SQLAlchemy?) to the use of TAP queries.
This has been extensively explored in DP0.2 (albeit over Qserv), so we don't anticipate any
issues, with the following one exception:

The existing Python "convenience function" for obtaining a reference to the RSP TAP service
from within a Notebook Aspect notebook, with the necessary authentication information
embedded automatically, does not currently support there being more than one TAP service
per RSP instance.
Therefore, if DP0.3 is released in the same instance as DP0.2, which will require the use of
two TAP services in the same instance, as noted above, some work will be required to

> generalize this.

Reviewer: Could you not just write another convenience function specific to the solar system TAP service that is different  from the existing one as interim workaround, e.g "get_tap_service()" and "get_sso_tap_service", with the latter pointing to the TAP URL for the SSO catalogs?

Author: We could, but I'd view that as a Plan B fallback, too trivial to mention here.  We need the generalization for other reasons as well.

Authentication and Authorization
--------------------------------

At the moment we are not aware of any special restrictions on access to the SSSC simulation,
so the baseline would be to make all DP0.2 and DP0.3 data accessible to the same set of users
and base it on the CILogon/COmanage IAM mechanism to which DP0.2 is in the process of being transitioned.

Timeline
========

- January 2023: Refine definition of this Data Preview.
  Review existing SSSC data model for any changes needed for DPDD and/or standards (e.g., IVOA)
  conformance (Dubois-Felsmann, Juric).

- February 2023: Regenerate simulation (Juric).
  Produce initial Felis data model (Dubois-Felsmann).
  Prepare necessary USDF infrastructure (R. Dubois).

- March 2023: Initial version of data turned over to USDF team.
  Ingest into Postgres at USDF (Mueller).
  Fix/regenerate source data if problems are found.

- April 2023: Establish TAP service in Google Cloud over USDF Postgres DB (SQuaRE).
  Complete Portal (context image selection) and Notebook (TAP service helper function) software refinements.

- May 2023: Exercise DP0.3 internally.
  Complete DataLink microservices and metadata deployment (SQuaRE and D-F).

>   CET develops tutorials and notebooks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Develop tutorials and notebooks (Community Engagement Team (CET))
```

> - 26 May 2023: Release candidate turned over to product owners.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 26 May 2023: Release candidate turned over to product owners (Dubois-Felsmann & Slater)
```

Reviewer 2: I'm not really sure what this means.

Author: It means that at this point we sign off (or not!) on it being acceptable for release to the Delegates.

- 13 June 2023: Nominal release date.

- June-September 2023: Public (RTN-011) commitment for release date.

Preparations Required
=====================

Regeneration of the Simulation
------------------------------

An initial review of the existing SSSC simulation, performed last year by Gregory Dubois-Felsmann
and Mario Juric, exposed some minor issues in consistency with the DPDD and other aspects of the
schema.
Mario described the changes that were suggested as very easy to make.

> We also understand that the SSSC will in any event want to regenerate the simulation based on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SSSC have stated that they want to  regenerate the simulation based on the recently released V3.0 of the baseline survey.
```

Reviewer: and add a citation to PSTN-055 - SCOC phase two survey recommendations

a more recent survey plan simulation.

So the first step in preparation for DP0.3 would be to confirm the changes needed and then
proceed to re-run the simulation.
If a visit table is decided to be a useful adjunct to DP0.3, this would be the time to define
and generate it.

Database Setup
--------------

Ingest
------

On `PREOPS-1152`_, Mario Juric reports that:

"For our internal use, we've used pg_bulkload to rapidly (in ~30 minutes) ingest these tables into a database.

> The details are in this (messy) notebook.

Reviewer: Which notebook? Replace this statement with a link to the notebook (or other documentation) where this is described

> Using more typical loading mechanisms (from .csv files, etc.) is not an issue, just will be slower.

Reviewer: Missing a closing end '"'

Author: It's not - that's conventional American copy-editing for a multi-paragraph quote.

https://www.grammar-monster.com/punctuation/quotation_marks_multiple_or_new_paragraphs.html

"If a postgres database can be set up within the RSP, with pg_bulkload enabled and given administrative permissions I would be able to load these data into it probably in a ~few days.
This setup would also allow for uploads of future dataset updates: we refresh these simulations ~annually, as new baseline simulations become available and the software is improved."

> 

Reviewer: Can the above text be reformulated into a coherent statement as to what we will do (or the options for what we might do) rather that a quote from a Jira ticket.  Keep a reference to he Jira ticket though.

Reviewer 2: I would drop this ingest section because these are implementation details.

Author: The intent was to include implementation details in the technote as the work progresses.

Reviewer 2: I would be ok with reporting on the implementation once it's decided, but I'd like DAX to be able to have a look and consider the options before we start publicizing that.

Data Model Metadata
-------------------

Service Deployment
------------------

Potential New Services
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> 

Reviewer: What is the ETA for filling these section in? We could release a first version now without this but if so, add a line that these sections will be completed once we have a better idea of the implementation details
